What, and Parade?
Excuse me?
And Parade.
There's a range.
But really, I didn't know that.
You mean, the New York Review of Books and the New Yorker don't have the same material?
Well, I haven't noticed it.
I mean, they may have.
It just never came to my attention that they both have the same books.
do that would have material enough for both, but the kind of thing that I don't know what is there.
It's really excerpted for anything long, you know, and Hersey and... Truman Capote, Hersey and Truman Capote, and then a couple others.
Oh, Rachel Carson.
That's the other one I was trying to think of.
I knew there was a woman in there somewhere.
I've never done one like this before.
It's a press conference.
It's in between a press conference and an interview.
I guess we'll decide generally.
Did you see this book almost as a bookend to your executionist song in a way?
Oh, Michael Gilmore's book you're talking about?
No, your book.
Your executionist.
Oh, is this book a bookend?
Kind of a bookend.
I hope not.
Well, in terms of joking, you know, Larry and I would sometimes call it an executionist song, too.
Larry being Larry Schiller.
And maybe because...
I did have a very small joke with myself and maybe a few readers, which is the first line of this book is a little bit like the first line of the executioner song.
The first line of the executioner song went something like, Linda was six when she fell out of the apple tree.
And this book begins, I think, something like, Bahlia was three when she burned her face on the stove.
And so that was sort of just the inside joke.
But they're really, they're much alike in certain ways, but they're also different.
in that I didn't see any attempt to try to argue that this was a novel, and I didn't want to push it to become a novel.
With the execution I saw, I thought I really was on the cusp, and it was interesting to me to claim it was a novel, because I felt that there's a lot of misunderstanding of what a novel is.
A novel finally is a way of attacking reality.
It's your approach to reality.
Nonfiction digests much more and feeds it back to the reader.
Whereas in fiction, you try to create a presence.
You try to create the life affair without judging it, letting the reader judge it.
And that's a sizable difference.
And my proof used to be with the executioner's song was that you could change the names of the characters.
You called Harry Kilmore instead of Gary Gilmore.
And people would say, well, it's a key novel.
You know who the people are.
Harry Kilmore is Gary Gilmore.
But they wouldn't argue whether it was a novel or not.
But you were trying to find, to determine, you were searching for a character out of a real personality.
trying to determine what.
Well, I wanted to portray him as a character in a novel rather than having long essays about the nature of the psychopath and so forth and so on and where Gary Gilmore emerged and what his movie was.
I wanted to create it rather than.
But with Oswald, I felt it was impossible because finally you can't make a fictional character out of Oswald.
Well, John DeLillo did and did rather well with it, but you can't do it without
changing a lot of the ways in which you're working.
I don't know if I can put my finger on it a little bit.
Maybe I'm not following it.
You said you were trying to create a character with Gilmore?
You were trying to create a character as opposed to delineating one that all of you... I wasn't trying to create a character who didn't exist.
I was thinking of a real-life character and I was saying as close to it as I could.
But I've always had this belief that in journalism, the closer you stay to the reality, no matter how close you stay to the reality, you're still going to be way off of necessity.
So in a way, aren't you saying that maybe the line between fiction and nonfiction is not so thick as one might assume?
Well, most people think it's a Berlin Wall.
Absolutely.
And I think, on the contrary, it's a barely marked boundary.
And you've been toying with it for a while.
And I love working back and forth on either side of the boundary.
I like being a range rider on that line.
If Executioner's Song were published this year, do you think they would still put it in the fiction shelves?
Because at that point,
the people who were out there on the edge like you were using non-fiction techniques, or using fiction techniques in non-fiction, and so therefore it could be defined as fiction because the techniques were those that weren't fiction.
Well, there was a lot of argument at the time, but finally an author isn't tired of saying this book, or at least that was the working premise then, I assume it hasn't changed.
But I just never felt this was fiction, the Oswald book.
And it was something else, which is I was in a colloquy with the reader.
That's the big difference between the two books.
The second half of Oswald's tale, I'm talking to the reader all the time.
I'm saying, here, I feel pretty sure of this stuff.
And there, I don't really know what I'm talking about too well.
And there's a lot of confusion there.
We have to look at Oswald under three possibilities, three subheads.
That's for instance when he's alone in Dallas,
that period when nobody knows where he was for a couple of weeks.
Either he's being trained as some sort of agent for some intelligence organization, or he's having a homosexual interlude, or he's just so sick of all the pressures he's been under for all these years that he's just holding up by himself so he can be alone and have time to think.
These are three possibilities that occur to me, and I thought we really have to keep all three in mind as we move forward.
Now, I found something interesting with that, that, you know, one of the reasons you write, you write for many reasons, but one of the reasons you write is to learn more about writing.
And what I learned there is that you can do that and somehow the character becomes more alive.
That is, in the actor giving him three possible motivations, all different, that didn't blur him.
That rounded him in an odd way.
And then I realized that's the way we look at all our friends.
Most of the time, friends, mates, children, enemies, buddies, everybody, we look at them, we don't always think they're doing it for this reason.
Sometimes we're saying they're doing it for reason A, or they're doing it for reason Z, or maybe they're doing it for some reason in the middle they haven't found yet.
We must have the same friend.
We must have the same group of friends.
Yeah.
So what I'm getting at, but that...
It doesn't take away from the reality of our friends.
It's just that we walk along with suppositions on people's natures all the time.
And so I found that that sort of made him more comfortable in a paradoxical way.
That because we're not saying he did this, and he did this, and he is this, but rather, what is he at this point?
Who is he at this point?
You get nearer, you get more interested in him.
You get more of a sense of his three-dimensionality that way.
I wanted to ask you about your association with Schiller.
which I find fascinating, both from a reader's viewpoint and a writer's.
I want to know, well, no, I wouldn't call him an assistant.
No, no, he's like Hollywood.
He's been, I mean, he was on Gilmore before you were, wasn't he?
Oh, yeah, yeah, he was on Gilmore for quite a while.
In fact, we weren't too friendly at that point.
We'd worked together on Maryland, and we'd had a lot of fights because he was interested in the photographs and I was interested in the text.
And we sort of,
We negotiated with one another much of the time, and there were periods where we weren't even speaking to one another during Maryland.
But then we worked on a small book together, which was better, called The Faith of Graffiti.
And then on the Executionist song, he was in the thick of it.
And I was just watching it on television, and I remember laughing with someone who knew him, and a former secretary of mine, and she said at one point,
I think it's just going to be a few days before Mr. Schiller's on the phone.
And sure enough, Larry called, and he said, listen, I'd like to, I've done an interview in Playboy, and I'd like you to read it.
It's with Gary Gilmore.
So I said, sure, and then I read it.
It was a marvelous interview.
So I said, I'd like to make a play out of that.
And he said, well, if you want to make a play out of it, you've got to do the book first.
So that's how we got into doing that.
He had the rights locked up, didn't he?
He had pretty many of the rights to those stories locked up very early on.
With Gary Gilmore, yeah.
He's very good at that.
But he's not just a packager.
He's a good journalist.
He's a good interviewer.
He's a very good interviewer.
Very good interviewer.
I can't say I was that impressed with the O.J.
subscription.
Well, this is what I was going to ask.
What is this, a skid into the rhinestones?
Forget it.
I'll tell them that.
No, that's what Life magazine said when Rita Hayworth married Dick Hames, a skid into the rhinestone.
Oh.
No, I think that was a job.
Larry Larry got called to do it.
And he, I think he enjoyed doing it.
And, you know, he made a reasonable amount.
Simpson did get most of the money there.
It wasn't Larry that was, you know.
Anyway, I don't want to get into that.
It wasn't a job.
But how do you work together?
Do you divide up the interviews?
No, we usually do interviews together.
Technically, you do.
He'll sometimes do an interview when I'm not around.
He's a very hard worker.
When we were over in Minsk, the interviews would take a long time because you had the English and the Russian.
I've said this many times right now.
It was an hour for the English and an hour for the Russian.
But now I'm arguing with the translator, because one of the things we discovered is that you can't talk a certain way in the old Soviet Union.
You really have to phrase your remarks.
And so sometimes the translator, who was a very strong-minded young lady, would say, who parenthetically, she and Larry got married and divorced six months after we finished in Minsk.
I have a question.
It's really, I guess, what I'm... Wait, did I finish the point?
Let me just finish that.
I'm getting... I'm long-winded, but we'll cover this.
Larry and I work together in interviews.
We're all together different.
So very often we collide.
He'll be taking a line of questioning that irritates me, because I think it's the wrong line of questioning.
And I'll cut across him or vice versa.
And then we get angry at each other.
Sometimes it's comic.
because there's a poor Russian sitting there looking around bewildered, and a few of us are screaming at one another, you know, and that happened once or twice.
But generally, what Larry does is he organizes the situation.
For instance, we needed several translators, not one.
We had a lot of documents on how to be translated that we're getting from the KGB and other people.
We needed this, we needed that.
So he organized an office over there in Minsk.
And as I say, he's a very hard worker, so he'd be up early in the morning organizing the office,
Then he'd be arranging interviews, and that very often involved filing people, which was 30 years later.
Sometimes they were still in Minsk, sometimes they were in other places.
And then, as I said, we'd do interviews together, and then we'd meet in the evening.
There wasn't anything to do in Minsk except work.
We'd meet in the evening, and we'd argue and discuss what we'd heard that day, because we had a lot of theories on what had happened.
And slowly, over a period of time, I ended up with much less...
conspiratorial material than I wanted.
I mean, I was hoping to find more conspiratorial material.
And the sad grim truth that kept beating in on us all the time is that the KGB was such a conservative organization.
They were looking for the same thing.
They were looking for conspiratorial material.
They were looking for the same thing and didn't find it.
And we were repeating it.
And finally, we ended up believing them as we got to understand how conservative they were.
I mean, the key thing to remember there is that not only was it a bureaucracy, but it was a bureaucracy which was very dangerous at the top.
You know, before 1960, in the 30s, the 40s, and the 50s, the head of the KGB had been executed by Stalin.
Now, it was a post-Stalinian period in 1960, but they had formed very deep habits of, don't put your name on a piece of paper that's going to become an embarrassing piece of paper.
So when it came down to interviewing Oswald, in the beginning, I couldn't believe they didn't debrief him formally.
But then as you get to know them, bit by bit, you know, they're very
They're full of finesse.
They prefer to go around three sides of a square.
If they have to go from here to there, they'll go around this way.
You've described them as being conservative, too, to your surprise.
Yeah, very conservative sexually.
You know, they really hated taking down sexual dialogue.
Why?
Because it irritated the higher-ups.
It was a very... Slowly, what you're going to realize is that this evil empire was, in fact, just a sad...
Third world country that was very depressed, had no real international force within itself.
You know, they still have the ghost of the old threat, but there was none there.
All they wanted was to live a little better.
And so it, you know, it served such a mockery with the evil empire.
Because one's ears was still ringing with Ronald Reagan and the evil empire.
This empire hadn't been evil for 20 years.
And the concluding lines of the book, you suggest quite pointedly that this is an American tragedy.
Having said that and put that forth, are we to assume then that Lee Harvey Oswald is a tragic hero?
And if so, what qualities does he have that makes him heroic and even admirable in some respects?
I think he's a tragic figure, not a tragic hero.
He's an anti-hero, if anything.
What's an anti-hero?
Someone who goes in for large ventures and makes a mess of them.
I think that's one definition of an anti-hero.
Someone who eats away at our notion of heroism.
I think he wanted to be a hero, and he absolutely failed at that.
Tragedy, however, does imply certain admirable qualities.
And you are constantly in the book trying to see qualities.
You are looking almost desperately for something there that's not, as you said, just a failure or a passing.
Because, I mean, I think I'm connecting.
I think we are.
This is really the line I think we're interested in most about the book.
It ramifies in a number of ways.
What draws you to this book is in some ways you're writing against postmodernism.
Hopefully I have, yes.
I hate postmodernism.
Right, and one of the things you say about it, I want to come back to that in other ways, but one of the things you say about it is it's got to do with antiheroes and smallness.
So if you can invest him with some qualities that unionize him, then you vanquished at least some of postmodernism.
All right, good, good.
Let me, before I answer, I do want to answer this.
And that ties in with what I said.
Yeah, let me reverse it for a moment.
What is the passion everyone has to have him small,
and essentially meaningless and an identity.
Why?
Because I have found, you know, for instance, there was a fairly good review in the Sunday Times, New York Sunday Times, but then at the end, he says, but Mayer is dead wrong on his being a tragic figure.
He's a cockroach.
Well, you know, I started thinking, that's a passion there.
You know, Tom Powers had a passion to believe Oswald is small.
Now, I would say it
I would ask all of you, why do you have the strong feeling that you don't want them bigger than?
Let me try to answer that.
I don't have that feeling.
My gut feeling is I don't know who killed President Kennedy.
And I think if you want to define postmodernism in a sentence, it's not knowing who killed your president 30 years later.
Not really knowing in your gut, not being sure.
So I feel like in some ways that may be what drew you.
If you could get to the core of that question, maybe you could put to rest all of the kinds of uncertainty that's spread out from it, that's spawned from it.
All right, well, let's go back, because I'm not sure I can answer you there.
I'm not sure that was my motive.
What was your motive?
What drew you to Oswald?
You said the Belarus KGB contacted you.
Well, I had mixed motives.
First of all, not all my motives were honorable in relation to I'm going to write this book, and this book is enormously important to me.
I had secondary motives, and one of them was to learn more about the KGB, because I wanted that for Hornet's Ghost.
So, but I also had been absolutely obsessed with Oswald and the assassination for 30 years.
I'd been a conspiratorialist.
I'd read a lot of the literature over the years.
I'd lived with it.
I tried to... You reviewed Mark Lane's book?
I reviewed it.
I gave it a good review back in whatever the year was.
It was 67, wasn't it?
I forget.
But anyway, I was terribly suspicious of the whole thing.
The more I got to know about the CIA, the more I began to understand that
They don't, with the exception of the Bay of Pigs, they really did very few things from the top.
And even when they were doing the Bay of Pigs, they were quarantining it, so not all the top knew what was going on at the same time.
And certainly it seemed to me there was beyond their measure to have plotted any assassination of Kennedy from the top.
That had to be distorted.
Probably there were enclaves in the CIA.
If anyone in the CIA had done it, it would have been enclaves.
So I was about that point when I started the book.
I'm not being very organized with you three today because I'm not answering the basic question you asked.
Well, let me try to answer this one then.
If I take care to a degree of each agenda, then maybe we can wander more.
I was surprised when I started studying Oswald's life, I was surprised at how ballsy he was.
I never think, when a guy's got guts, I never look upon him as an identity.
Because we all know that guts is the hardest single thing for a man to have.
It's just not routine.
It's in disrepute now because machismo is scoffed at.
But if he's obnoxious, Ballsy.
Well, then he's obnoxious, ballsy, but it doesn't mean he's a nerd.
Don't you think there's something unique about him just going, I want to live in Russia.
I want to just be ideological.
I want to check out Russia.
I think it's childlike and strange.
Oh, come on, come on now.
It's not childlike and strange at all.
What do you mean he's never been anywhere and he suddenly says, oh, I think I'll go live in Russia?
He wanted so desperately to be taken seriously.
Listen, he was a gambler at a high stakes table at the least.
because even if he's childlike and strange, and he was that too, nonetheless, he's read enough to know that he's betting that everything he reads in the papers and everything he hears in the media that the Soviet Union is in terrible, terrible places wrong.
That's a very large bet, because you're betting with your life.
And again, he's desperate.
Nonetheless, some people who are desperate just slowly collapse and die young, and others who are desperate try things.
And this guy tried it.
He went over there.
And then he gets over there,
And once he's over there, I found my astonishment.
I mean, he was a weak, pathetic figure.
He reminded me of myself in Paris at the age of 23.
Can't speak the language, thought I could, now I can't.
Didn't stay in your hotel room.
No, I didn't stay in my hotel room.
That to me indicates just how terrified he was once he got there.
It was like he used all his courage to get there, and then he collapsed.
And then slowly he gains his courage over a couple of years.
And he also gets repelled by the life of the Soviet Union.
And he suddenly wants to go back.
Well, then he takes on both bureaucracies.
That's not a small business.
So he takes on both bureaucracies, and he succeeds.
He succeeds through, really, he's at his most adroit there, because he inspires, he senses that these bureaucracies, he understands them in some funny way, he understands their fear.
Their fear is they're going to get caught with something they can't handle.
And so he works on the Russians to the point where the Russians are saying to themselves, he's so unstable, if he commits suicide again,
It'll be a scandal for us.
And of course, for a bureaucrat, what it means is, I don't want it to be my scandal.
So they keep passing.
That's like musical chairs.
So finally, when no one will agree to accept the fact that they're without a chair, they decide they're going to let them go back.
And then the same thing happens with the State Department, where they say, how can we not accept him and his wife?
Because if we don't accept him and his wife, if we just accept him, it'll be an international scandal.
American who's defective wants to come back.
and uh we will accept him but not his wife so they decide they have to accept him and his wife and his child well that takes more than uh ordinary uh stick-to-itiveness if nothing else took him a year to get back a year of writing letters all the time keeping up the pressure in fact it was a year and a half before he got back so there's all that then he gets back and and he takes a pot shot at general walker that's not exactly you don't go out in an alley at night facing
these right-wing, these John Birchers who might have people all around the house who might be the catchmen, beat them up.
No, I mean, he's got guts.
In some ways, you portray him as a single soul against both bureaucracies and against a failed communism.
Someone who has a vision that's beyond anything that's realized, you know, sort of really deeply idealistic, willing to take it all on, willing to be a terrorist against all of it.
Well, you know, he is that.
He's a great many other things as well, because that's the sign of him that's boldest.
He's also the failed husband, the bad worker, the man who can't spell.
He's a complex figure.
Can I just stay with that for a minute?
I know I'm talking about it.
Please feel free to shut me up at some point.
But I do want to say the business about his dyslexia and his syntax, and you cleaning it up for the most part.
I mean, I understand your motives in doing that.
But it sort of signaled to me the degree to which you were identifying with him.
Because you give him your syntax.
You give him your mastery.
No, no, no.
In fact, I gave him my assistant's syntax.
Oh, did you?
No, no, I didn't want to get into it when I started playing with the pros.
You gave him another syntax.
No, I gave her a very... She's a very intelligent woman.
I gave her a specific instruction.
I said, don't improve him.
Just clean him up.
And, you know, then she'd have spots where she'd say, what do I do here?
And we'd look at it, we'd discuss it.
So, but there was...
I didn't want to give him a style that he didn't deserve.
In other words, I felt... A member of my family has had dyslexia, so I felt it was very bright.
So I had a certain personal feeling there.
But usually there's an inability to read as well as an inability to write, and yet he is portrayed as reading and reading and reading and doing that above all else.
Well, we don't know how he read.
That is, I can see where you can have dyslexia and you can still read.
Just force yourself to read at great speed.
What you pick up, you pick up.
What you don't, you don't.
But he... He was reading very difficult things.
Yeah.
Very literate people would have... Yeah, he was reading fairly good stuff, fairly tough stuff.
And, what was it, Robert Payne on Mao Zedong and Mein Kampf and... Can I quote Norman Mailer to you from 1963, your Paris interview?
Now a man can be evil, but I believe that people can be evil in their essential natures and still have good characters.
Of course, you're talking about fiction, but I wonder if that applies as well, in your view?
Of him?
I don't think he had a good character.
I think he had a bad character.
He was a psychopathic liar.
He was a brute with his wife.
No, I don't think he had a good character.
So that doesn't apply at all?
I would think not, no.
Okay.
Did I say that no one can be evil?
No.
Now a man can be evil.
Can be evil, yeah.
I believe that people can be evil in their essential natures and still have good characters, which I thought was very... Well, they're effective.
They're effective.
Again, of course, we're talking about fictional works there.
I'm not sure he was evil in his...
essential nature either i'm not sure either you know i've lived with it back and forth and uh he could have been evil he could have definitely been evil and is he a character in your view or a being because you drew a distinction of that review as well a character i bet i'd say he's a being rather than a character i feel much sure you might explain for these other two which with the difference i still remember when i think i'll read it to you a character is someone you can grasp as a whole you can have a clear idea idea of him but a being is someone where nature keeps shifting
All right, he would definitely be a being.
No, he's absolutely a being, not a character.
Which is part of the problem with him.
You do plot some consistency.
I mean, you do plot consistency.
It seems to me two things happen simultaneously.
Conspiracy theory falls away more and more.
The lone gunman becomes ascendant, and he has a personality and a character.
He becomes more confidential, and you cannot prevent yourself, you as writer, it seems to me, from openly sympathizing in some ways with his pathos, caring for him.
Well, you can feel pathos for a great many people that finally you disapprove of.
I mean, that's part of the... Okay, there's a limit.
I mean, are you capable of pathos for Hitler?
Probably not.
No, no.
No, sorry.
Well, but Oswald's not him.
No, no, he's not.
The numbers are different for one thing.
Sure.
You know, it'd be much harder to feel pathos for it, let's say.
Assuming Timothy McVeigh was Gilley.
It'd be much harder to feel pathos for him than for Oswald.
Now you're getting into my next question.
All right.
If Oswald were here today, would he be a member of a militia?
Would he be on the internet?
Would he be one of those boring nerds out there?
I think he'd be on the internet.
He'd be postmodernist.
I think he'd, I think he'd be, I don't know that... As well on the internet, I like it.
Yeah.
Well, you can have it.
I have to share.
I'm not.
Are you?
I can't deal with the internet, all that banality.
It's hard enough to get everything done without having one more thing to do.
People come up to me on the street and hand me a brochure.
I say, I'm sorry, I've got too much information.
That's the way I feel.
I don't want any more coming in.
Anyway, you think he might be... He would have been on the internet, for sure, sending out all kinds of manifestos and statements.
Well, look at his political programming.
He was a libertarian back then.
He wanted no government.
Both governments were wrong.
Both governments were bad.
He wanted no government.
He wanted small collective groups formed by a mutual association, a mutual agreement.
He might have been a militiaman.
That's not unlike what they want.
I think he kind of liked the idea of killing people one by one and choosing a target very carefully, which is altogether different from blowing up a building indiscriminately with hundreds of people inside.
And he wasn't on the right, if we can believe this account.
He wasn't on the far right.
Well, the latest conspiracy on the internet, I understand, was the second bomb that really brought the building down, and there's some FBI man spreading this story, that it was really a conspiracy out of Washington.
I'm not quite sure why this goes.
Oh, you mean they took the first bomb to hide the second bomb?
Yes.
The second bomb was buried in the bowels of the building?
Anyway.
Oh boy, we're off again, aren't we?
You said that writing fiction, of course, is the primary calling.
Do you continue to feel that way?
And if so, how do you place this book into the corpus of the 28 books that you've written?
Fiction's got a lot of virtues for me that nonfiction doesn't have.
It's more interesting.
It's more exciting.
It's chancier.
But that was the main event for you once upon a time, I think, as well.
Well, it's fiction.
The thing is, fiction's a grace.
You get it.
It's like falling in love.
You can't say, I want to fall in love next year.
You can say, next year I'm going to write a book of nonfiction about this or that.
I can choose a nonfiction book and decide I want to do it and do it.
And know the odds are very much in my favor that I'll finish that book.
It just involves bringing a certain amount of energy and attention and dedication to the book.
But with fiction, you can start with a marvelous idea and it can depart from you.
Your characters can disappoint you.
They can disappear on you.
Or you discover as you get into the book that
you're heading toward an unknown continent, and you don't know enough about it, which is what happened with Arnold's Ghost.
I realized that if the book was going to make any sense at all for me, I mean, I could have faked the KGB, I could have faked the whole thing, but then I would have felt that the first half, in which I spent so much time, was now being betrayed.
So I kind of come to a stop and feel that I don't know anymore about the KGB than I've read in newspapers, books, so forth, and I don't believe any of it.
It isn't good enough.
It's too pat.
It's too, I want to meet this evil organization up close.
So, of course, when you meet it up close, what you find is absolutely fascinating, because what you've got are a series of high-level professionals, very much like their CIA counterparts, who see themselves as patriots and engage in a tricky, difficult, but essentially noble profession.
You know, and if you start to have a discussion with them on the order of, what about the gulags?
They'd look at you about the way a CIA man would glare back if you said, yes, but how about marry in prison, you see?
And he'd look at you and say, well, what the hell's that got to do with me?
Is there a sense in which the Oswald book is a continuation of all this goes out?
No, no.
I have a feeling you have no.
Well, actually, I was also going to ask, so you,
To make clear, you really went there to research two books, then.
No, no, no, no.
I was passive about whatever I would learn about the KGB that didn't go into the Oswald book would be there somewhere, and my imagination could work on it.
But you did have to step back from Harlan's Ghost for a while, learn more.
Yeah, but I may have made the wrong move, as far as that goes, because when you use something directly, you very often don't have anything left over for the novel.
For example, when...
Bressa and I were in that mayor rally campaign.
Everybody was saying to us, oh, you're going to write about it, for sure.
But in fact, we kept using it as we did it.
If we saw something interesting in that day, that was in our speeches two hours later.
Because there is that about politics, that you keep feeding yourself in order to be able to keep giving it out.
And before it was all over, you know, people say, you're going to write about it.
We say, we're never going to write about it.
We just knew it, and we did it.
There just was nothing to write about.
I mean, I couldn't write a paragraph about that Mayor Ali campaign.
It would be interesting.
Could you do it now?
Could you do it now after something?
Now I can write a page, maybe, but I could never write a book about it.
Although I learned a lot, but it was all... You said it made you less interesting.
If I remember correctly, you said there was something about active politics that makes one less interesting.
Yeah, yeah.
And one becomes less interesting to oneself.
Yeah, you get awfully tired of yourself.
because finally you become a fraud just by campaigning.
I think it just does terrible things to language, don't you?
The language, well, we used to work hard on our language while we were campaigning.
Give us that.
You know, it was the 12th speech of the day.
We were still trying to give a good speech and keep the English reasonably decent and not degenerate.
But I want to tell you, it took a lot out.
It took a lot out of him, took a lot out of me.
Anyway, it may have happened, because I wasn't going to hold back on this book.
I never believed in holding back on it, but
Each book you do, you give it whatever you're capable of giving.
About Oswald's tale, so I wasn't holding back.
I wasn't saying, this is too good to get to this book, no.
And it may be that when I start writing about it, it really won't come alive for me, the KGB.
I might have made a mistake that way.
I'll find out.
Or I might decide that there's not going to be that much KGB.
Now that I know what the KGB is, I don't have to write about it that hard.
You know, I'm writing a novel about the CIA, not the KGB.
You've always maintained, though, the plot emerges from your characters.
Is that the same here?
Yeah.
I just didn't have any characters for the KGB, put it that way.
Now I have a few, maybe.
And you still don't really know where the plot of this next novel is going to go.
No, no.
I like to discover the plot.
Are we talking about the next novel as a continuation of all this?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, Oswald's tale is not a continuation.
Well, I made the promise.
Let's see if I keep it.
It's still an open bank.
It's hard riding them all.
I mean, I've been riding enough fights all my life, and I finally come to understand old fighters.
I know why old fighters don't like tough fights.
Because they kill you.
They really age you.
You know, an old fighter, like Foreman, or like Hollywood.
Well, like a German fighter, that'll affect his crack again.
Well, no, but, you know, you get into them, and at the end of it, their bodies have taken a beating from which they won't finally recover completely.
And they don't like it.
And riding is like that, fucking fiction.
Too much anxiety, it just heats up your guts.
I mean, there are great many benefits to it, but you pay a physical price.
You have to keep competing with yourself, and it gets tiring.
Well, it's scary, because on a given day, you can wreck the book.
And so it's sort of, to that extent, it's a slightly, it's a high-wire act.
When you have a good book, the anxiety increases.
So that's the similarity in writing and finding, right?
Yeah, you can be ahead against the fighter you shouldn't be ahead on, and think of the subtle anxiety or is there not to lose it.
I'm just thinking of the elements of risk, the elements of going out there and maybe just really being thoroughly embarrassed, just being on the edge of yourself.
And in Oswald, you give Oswald some really powerful language right near the end as he's there with his rifle, and you say something about him descending into the bottom of himself, awaiting judgment.
I mean, that very paragraph could have been about a writer or a fighter.
Well, I felt that.
Look, I thought if he was going to succeed at that point, it was because he would transcend himself.
You know, Oswald was always a bell-shaped curve.
He was always all of the bell-shaped curve.
In other words, any activity he'd engage in, if you see what is worst and see what is best, there's very little similarity.
So I rather like the idea that he could miss a rabbit from 10 feet with a shotgun, and you have to pull off a couple of those shots.
Because that was his nature.
The best and the worst were very far apart.
That doesn't mean, you know, that you end up with a deep affection for the guy.
You don't.
The hardest thing with Oswald is it's very hard to feel affection for him of any sort.
You know, we were talking about pathos a little earlier.
You don't feel pathos for Hitler.
Well, you don't feel much for Oswald.
It's part of the problem with writing about it.
I feel it from Marina.
Oh, yeah.
She's, I think, an absolutely fascinating character.
And I was baffled by that New York Times Magazine interview with June.
I was cheap as a kid.
She seems to portray an entirely different woman from what you do.
I suppose that's the distance of another generation.
Well, Marina has many sides, and she's very tough, Marina.
Yeah, she had to be.
You know, Larry Schiller was always throwing Tolstoy around when he'd talk to people.
he got the russians to in part he got them to agree to do it because he kept saying you can't say no to manor he's our american so what happens is he did the same thing with marina when he wanted to get the interviews with her he kept saying well this is hard you realize and and of course marina's so complex she rather loved the idea a good writer writing about her so then she read the excerpt that was in the new yorker and larry called her up and said what do you think of it and she said well
He's not Tolstoy.
So... I'd like to talk a little bit about... Could I just ask one more thing about Maria, just to finish that?
Now you see what Larry and I went through.
Well, you know, I'm the female here.
I've got to leap in once in a while.
No, no, no, no.
I just mean that for all of you, you all have an idea of what it was like working with you.
That's what you're doing, huh?
Except we're not arguing with each other.
Why don't you just go ahead?
No, go ahead.
Go ahead, please.
I want you to go past me first, please.
I keep envisioning these people as if they were contemporary today.
And I can see Marina on a talk show.
I can see her on Maury, or maybe not Oprah, but some of the others.
The thing that you say about him, craving attention, I see in all of these people, in Marguerite,
in Marina, and maybe there's a layer of the population there that just never gets any attention, and it seems that there's this hunger.
Well, Marguerite particularly, I think, was a precursor for a lot of women who need attention, who crave attention.
Marguerite had an almost physical need for attention.
Yeah.
And she's a remarkable woman, in fact.
Not agreeable, but remarkable.
In my mind.
And Malina, I think, would not necessarily be on these shows in a hurry.
She has a great deal of ambivalence about self-exposure.
On the one hand, she's so Russian and so full of guilt over so many things that she fears she has to confess.
On the other hand, it's anathema that I have confessed.
And she doesn't like people too much.
She's really seen the worst edge of the media all these years.
So the idea of baring her soul in public before the media would not appeal to her.
Marguerite would have loved it, because Marguerite was, in fact, in another time, if Marguerite had been born later, she probably would have been the host on a TV show and done all the talking.
I love that idea.
I'm sorry, thanks.
I'm interested also in putting this book in the perspective of your career, because I've been reading Norman Mailer
for a lot of years, quite with great pleasure.
And reading that Paris Review interview this morning really was great, because you do say a few things.
I don't know how old you were, 32 or 33?
What was the year of the review, I can tell you?
63.
63, I was 40.
So, but here you are saying, I've got to come to grips with myself, with my talent, with what I've made of it, and what I've spoiled of it.
That's one quote, and I love this one too.
talking about, in general, what a writer can do.
At best you affect, pardon me, the consciousness of your time, and so indirectly you affect the history of the time, which succeeds you.
I wonder if you feel that, looking back 30 years, have you, have you, do you have any solutions to those statements?
Well, I think, when I talk about, you know, what you spoil or ruin of your town, is this, you know, I was,
just wasting a lot of time and getting into a lot of capers and getting into troubles of one sort or another and losing this, losing that, and getting drunk too much and so forth, and killing a lot of writing like I could have done.
So I think over the years I've gotten that more or less in shape.
You know, I'm much more disciplined now than I was then.
The other thing about affecting the consciousness of your time, how do you know how much you affected?
I was thinking the other day about Hemingway, and I was thinking, my God, no American president, with the possible exception of Roosevelt and, I don't know, Kennedy and a couple others maybe,
has affected the American consciousness as much as Hemingway.
You can't see a movie or an ad these days that doesn't have Hemingway's influence on it.
You have some of those idiot ads where people skateboard off a mountain and end up in an icy pond holding a can of beer.
That's Hemingway.
You know, the whole idea of throwing away the gesture.
So in that sense, he's had an enormous influence.
Now, if I have any influence, I don't know.
You know, it's hard to...
You don't want to spend time saying, I have this influence on that, because you get, you know, you get, I don't know, you get, everything gets out of proportion.
There's a Forrest Sawyer on, what's that, is it Nightline, Ted Koppel's show?
He's the number two man there, Forrest Sawyer.
He's furious at us, because apparently he once had an afternoon where he saw a little bit of the KGB file, and then he did a show on it, and he spent a couple of weeks in Minsk interviewing people, and some people,
When the interviewer said we had done an exclusive, we hadn't gotten exclusive rights to the KGB file.
Well, we did in the sense that we actually saw the damn thing, that we Xeroxed 300 pages of it, that we lived there.
The main thing is we lived there for six months and did the job.
This guy's carrying on like it's the greatest miscarriage of justice since time began because we're taking away his influence.
Well, he sent me a transcript of his show, and it was a mediocre show.
We didn't tell you anything.
Well, you look impatient.
We don't want a particular piece of you.
Listen, I want to apologize.
This is the first time it hasn't really worked too well.
I want to apologize for this threesome.
Well, they should know better.
No, no, it was my doing.
I'm the one who's responsible.
They usually work well.
They should know what people to put together and what people are going to go in one direction.
I think you've got probably three strong-minded interviews.
Yeah.
I'm looking...
Usually there's a lead interviewer in a funny way, and so it works better.
We're all trying to jump at you a little bit.
Well, we've got three individuals.
That's good.
No, that's fine.
But yeah, I did want to leap in a given direction.
Go.
I wanted to leap and maybe stay with this just a little bit and come back to postmodernism.
I'm not necessarily now.
All right.
The business of what you call an algebraic intellectual is interesting.
I say it's not a very good one.
It's interesting, but it's really interesting that it keeps a journal.
You know, that he keeps a journal, and I was wondering when that... You're saying a real intellectual keeps a journal?
No.
No, he does.
I said, these are sort of two separate.
I'm compressing because this is my platform now.
Sorry.
But on the one hand, you call him an intellectual.
I would like you to sort of say what you mean by that.
And second, I found it interesting that he keeps a journal.
And the question asked is why.
Why did he keep a journal?
When did he stop keeping a journal?
What was a journal to him?
Well, wait a minute.
He kept a diary.
Okay.
And the diary I found meager and not terribly interesting, and not well-written.
And there's a lot of people, there's a lot of reason to believe he wrote that diary in a relatively short time, in a couple days or a week, a long time after the events.
It certainly sounds that way, doesn't it?
Yeah, it just doesn't have the ring of a real diary.
It really has the ring of somebody summarizing events sometime later.
So I don't know that he kept it general.
Why do you think he did that?
Well, I think he did it for a reason, whatever the reason was.
He may have taken some notes because he was thinking he'd write articles when he came back to America.
He may have decided that the way to do it and print in America is to be able to print a diary.
He was right that way, I think.
Some newspaper did print his diary at one point.
They got a hold of it and printed it.
I don't recall this exactly, but I have some recollection that the diary was found and printed somewhere.
Maybe I'm wrong on that.
But in any event, it's the kind of thing exactly that a newspaper would print.
And he was very passionate in some certain odd, small ways.
But no, I don't call him a good intellectual.
He was a mediocre intellectual.
But at the age of 24, he was writing, at the age of 23, he was writing stuff that wasn't bad.
I don't know if you looked at the appendix in the book, but his stuff on the Soviet Union cleaned up.
It's readable.
It's nothing remarkable, but I've read feature stories that were less interesting.
Let's say he was somewhere between a 23-year-old feature writer for a newspaper and an intellectual.
I call him an intellectual because he did do some of his own thinking, and his thinking was very important to him.
And finally, he lived.
If there's anything positive about him, it's that thought was that important to him.
In some ways, it seemed to have isolated him.
And it isolated him very much because nobody could understand him.
It isolated him specifically because the entire Russian community was opposed to him.
And of course, being down in the South at that point wasn't exactly the place to be a radical.
But then on top of that, he had a...
you know, he just made people nervous with all that political superiority.
I was going to move it towards the center ahead of that.
In some ways, the size of this, which I know people have talked about, it has a Russian novel, Science.
You know, it's a big novel.
And the fresh stuff is the Russian stuff.
It seems like you like the chance to, this was your Russian novel.
This was your chance to write a Russian novel.
Great vistas of time, space, populace,
to give a lot of indication of what it was like to live under Stalin, what it was like to resist Stalin, the ways in which one lived in fear, the ways in which one resisted.
All of that was very new, very interesting.
Well, that came out of the experience of writing the execution itself.
I didn't think ever that it was going to be my Russian novel, because I knew that that material was going to run out, that I had just so much of that material, and finally the emphasis was going to go from there to Oswald.
But I just wanted to finally locate him in a media
Structurally, what I found interesting was to have this milieu in which he appears almost as a minor figure, as a somewhat mysterious, shadowy figure in this milieu that you can understand better than you can understand him, and then take the story back of that and forward of that.
That just appeared to me structurally.
It was sort of crossing the T. You said from the very beginning you've always been a conspiracy theorist.
How do you end this book?
Well, it was much less of a conspiracy theorist.
I think there's still a real chance that there were conspiracies.
And although I end up guessing three to one that he did it alone, it's just a guess that he could easily have been part of some small conspiracy.
Are you still obsessed?
You said you were obsessed at the beginning.
Much less, much less.
Are you an obsessive person in general?
I try not to be.
Nothing's more wasteful.
No, I hate obsession.
It just consists of putting more and more energy into the same question and never getting an answer.
Are there any other obsessions that you care to tell us about, or is this one in particular?
When I was younger, I used to have a question, am I a good man or not.
That's a terrible obsession.
It's very wasteful.
It just keeps you circling around your navel all the time.
No, I'm fine.
Let me come back to this question in postmodernism.
and say that I think that one of the signs of it for me is the blurring of genre.
In other words, when people start writing nonfiction novels, and when the New York Times doesn't know whether a historian's work is fiction or nonfiction, doesn't know where to put Art Spiegelman's comic book, which they didn't.
They didn't know where to put it.
They put it first as fiction.
Then he wrote a letter saying, David Duke would like to know that you think the Holocaust is fiction.
That's very interesting.
And they put it in nonfiction.
It's all a hot potato.
I think, you know, much as you invade against postmodernism, you can't but be part of it.
That's really the observation I want to make, even in your career and your ability to negotiate different genres so well, and sort of collapse them.
Well, you know, I guess the reason I'm looking quizzical is you have a slightly different notion of postmodernism than I do.
My idea of postmodernism is that you mix strawberries with mustard.
In other words, the idea is that whatever you mix is interesting.
And I think it's because of a huge breakdown in values that finally the only way we can get a free soul clean longer is to try something new, even though there's not a hell of a lot of logic to it, viscerally.
I was interested in breaking down a lot of those barriers because I felt there was much too much pomposity attached to the categories.
Now, you could say that's a postmodernist impulse.
I would.
And I can't argue with that.
All right, I can't argue with that.
And that says all postmodernists.
Despite yourself.
Despite myself.
Mowgli.
Exactly.
All right.
But I always thought I was doing it in order to restore dignity to, this is pretty pompous myself, to modernity.
In other words, let's not pretend that history has a sanctity that the novel does not have.
History is also fiction.
I remember I started that with the armies of the night.
Everything that anyone ever writes is fiction, because having written all my life, I know how impossible it is ever to be accurate.
You are always misleading people.
You mislead people by the act of writing.
The hope is that you also spur their imagination so that they can find their particular misperceptions of reality, new and better misperceptions of reality than they had before.
So there are all these books that you've written, are they consistent?
Do we stand back when a career is done and we're tallying it up?
Has Norman Mailer produced a corpus of work that is identifiable from work one through work whatever it is?
I don't know.
I mean, that's a critical work.
I have themes.
How do you see it?
Do you see it as a ... I did an interview with Nadine Gordemaher here a couple months ago, and she said, everything I write is like walking into a room and
looking at the same statue from different angles, but it's all different takes on this.
Well, I don't know.
I have themes that I come back to.
I don't know if it's all the same.
You know, I could sit here and name themes I'm interested in, but I don't see the point of it, because that's a critic's book.
So everyone is a different, in your view, and everyone is a fresh start, and it's an entity.
No, I don't know.
I don't know how to answer that.
I'm trying to think how to answer it.
You see, when you're working, you don't say, I'm going to do this because it's a continuation of a theme I've been interested in.
What happens is you see an opportunity.
You'll see a book.
Very often I'll get excited by the idea of doing a novel because I feel that I have some special knowledge about the subject.
I have an inside track on the one hand.
On the other hand, I'm going to learn a lot by writing the book.
It's always been boring to me to write about something I know too well because I don't learn anything.
And I think you also use up your imaginative possibilities.
I'll come back to that in a moment.
So it's much more fun, as I say, to learn as you go in a book, provided you have this great advantage.
For example, in Heartless Ghost, I felt that I could have been an intelligence officer.
There was a side of me that was two-faced, deep,
comfortable with duplicity, all of that, and that I had a feeling for it.
On the other hand, I had a lot to learn about the CIA.
So that was a good mixture.
I enjoyed that.
I thought I was entering a world.
I know he was creating a world, but I could only create it in the act of entering it, imaginatively.
So that was a lot of fun.
Well, you put Tough Guys in it.
It was one of my favorite... Tough Guys was a gift.
And a lot of it was fun.
No, Tough Guys was a gift.
I knew a lot about Provincetown.
I'd been there off and on for 50 years.
And I was just in trouble.
I had to write a novel in two months.
So I thought, what am I going to write about?
I've got to write about something that I understand well.
Provenstein.
I never imagined it before.
I really loved the atmosphere of that book.
Well, you've been there, Provenstein.
I'm often.
Yeah.
Well, that's Provenstein in the winter, of course, which is different.
But that book was a gift.
I was ready to go in the tank on that book.
In other words, I had to fulfill a contract for Little Brown.
And if I didn't, I was going to owe them a huge sum of money.
I also love the story and the title, which I love to tell people.
Yeah, yeah.
I wish I'd put it in the movie.
That's the next story.
You said, and I also owed the money.
How were you going to finish that?
Well, so I had to, the choice was either to be in debt for the rest of my life, to Little Brown, or to produce a book in two months, because a whole year had gone by.
Two months, really?
Well, I spent, I was tired after ancient evenings.
I didn't feel like writing again.
And so 10 months went by, and so I realized I had a contract with them to do a book in a year.
And it was like I was a child.
So I said, oh, yes, I owe them a book.
So now I had to write the damn book, and it was one of those, I wrote the book, I worked very hard for two months in a row, and at the end of that time, I had a first draft that worked.
But when I started, I had to think, my God, this will be the worst thing I've ever written.
But I'm not going to be in debt for the rest of my life.
If I have to, I'll go in this time.
Do you have an affection for that book?
Yeah, yeah, it's my favorite book, not my best book, but it's my favorite book.
Because it pulled you out.
Yeah.
Well, follow up then, what's the best book?
I don't know, I wouldn't care to say.
I'd like to think one of the later ones is, one of the later big ones is, but I'd rather not get into that, because I could change my mind to mine.
I just followed up on, you know, you said not my favorite.
No, Tough Guys is my favorite as far as, you know, it's like if a mother has 20 children, she'll point at one as her favorite.
It was such a wonderful delivery.
You know?
The kid could be an idiot.
I just want to bring up what may be the sensitive point of size here.
And I took as a small, uncharacteristically small compared to a lot of your books.
I mean, you can say, look, the material demands that size.
In a sense, that's true.
But you write big books.
Is there a sense that the American novel has to be big to reflect this country, to make impact?
It will not be recognized.
Well, I think the reverse is true now.
If it's small.
The reverse is true.
I mean, everywhere I go now, booksellers, publishers, they always say, why don't you write a short book?
Write a short book.
You know, from top to bottom, it's all do a short book.
Booksellers' attitude is short books take up much less space on our shelves.
That's marketing.
It's all marketing.
And the cost is getting so high now.
Marketing is taking over writing now.
The idea is, the hell with what the book is, can we market it?
And no, big books are a luxury, an indulgence.
You know, as if it's easier to write on a big book than a small one.
Dinosaur was once ruled the Earth, but not much longer.
Yeah, not in literature.
I was convinced at an early age by Thomas Mann, who once said, only be exhausted.
It's truly interesting.
What time is it?
We're close.
Okay.
About two minutes.
Again, I'll pause one more time.
I think it worked out, actually.
Okay.
It was much more difficult, though.
I think as we got comfortable with each other, it worked out.
Well, it's been great.
Would you inscribe a couple of books?